lib/vfscore: Add README.md file (#780)
unikraft/unikraft: lib/vfscore/README.md

# VFSCore: Unikraft's Virtual File System API

> The `vfscore` is an internal library of Unikraft that provides a generic interface of system calls related to filesystem management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`vfscore` is an internal library of Unikraft that provides a generic interface of system calls related to filesystem management.
```

> There are multiple types of filesystems available in Unikraft (e.g: `ramfs`,` 9pfs`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are multiple types of filesystems available in Unikraft (e.g: `ramfs`, `9pfs`).
```

## Key Functions and Data Structures

> The `vfscore` library provides 2 structures to define operations on a filesystem (defined in [lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/mount.h](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/mount.h#L151)):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `vfscore` library provides 2 structures to define operations on a filesystem (defined in [`lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/mount.h`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/mount.h#L151)):
```

```c
struct vfsops {
        int (*vfs_mount)        (struct mount *, const char *, int, const void*);
        ...
        struct vnops    *vfs_vnops;
};
```

```c
struct vnops {
        vnop_open_t             vop_open;
        vnop_close_t            vop_close;
        vnop_read_t             vop_read;
        vnop_write_t            vop_write;
        vnop_seek_t             vop_seek;
        vnop_ioctl_t            vop_ioctl;
        ...
};
```

> The first structure mainly defines the operation of mounting the filesystem, while the second defines the operations that can be executed on files (regular files, directories, etc).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first structure mainly defines the operation of mounting the filesystem, while the second defines the operations that can be executed on files (regular files, directories, etc.).
```

The `vnops` structure can be seen as the `file_operation` structure in the Linux Kernel (more as an idea).
More about this structure [here](https://tldp.org/LDP/lkmpg/2.4/html/c577.htm).

The filesystem library will define two such structures through which it will provide the specified operations.

> To understand how these operations end up being used let's examine the [`open system call`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/syscalls.c#L111)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand how these operations end up being used let's examine the [`open` system call](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/syscalls.c#L111)
```

```c
int
sys_open(char *path, int flags, mode_t mode, struct vfscore_file **fpp)
{
        struct vfscore_file *fp;
        struct vnode *vp;
        ...
        error = VOP_OPEN(vp, fp);
}
```

[`VOP_OPEN()`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/vnode.h#L219) is a macro that is defined as follows:

```c
#define VOP_OPEN(VP, FP)           ((VP)->v_op->vop_open)(FP)
```

## Register a new filesystem

> To map the desired function for your filesystem with the vfscore application, you need to have declare a `struct vnops` [structure](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/ramfs/ramfs_vnops.c#L651) and populate its members, as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To map the desired function for your filesystem with the `vfscore` application, you need to have declared a `struct vnops` [structure](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/ramfs/ramfs_vnops.c#L651) and populate its members, as shown below:
```

> To map the desired function for your filesystem with the `vfscore` application, you need to have declare a `struct vnops` [structure](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/ramfs/ramfs_vnops.c#L651) and populate its members, as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To map the desired function for your filesystem with the `vfscore` application, you need to have declared a `struct vnops` [structure](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/ramfs/ramfs_vnops.c#L651) and populate its members, as shown below:
```

```c
struct vnops ramfs_vnops = {
		ramfs_open,             /* open */
		ramfs_close,            /* close */
		ramfs_read,             /* read */
		[...]

> };

Reviewer: Use spaces here instead of tabs. We don't use hard tabs in markdown.

```

If some of the functions are not used or not yet defined, you can use the `vfscore_vop_nullop` and cast it to the appropriate type:

```c
#define ramfs_open      ((vnop_open_t)vfscore_vop_nullop)
#define ramfs_close     ((vnop_close_t)vfscore_vop_nullop)
#define ramfs_seek      ((vnop_seek_t)vfscore_vop_nullop)
```

Let's see now how to link the "file operations" of a filesystem to the `vfscore` library.
For this, the library exposes a specific structure named `vfscore_fs_type`:

```c
struct vfscore_fs_type {
        /* name of file system */

>         const char *vs_name;       

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        const char *vs_name;
```
Check for trailing whitespaces.

        /* initialize routine */
        int (*vs_init)(void);
        /* pointer to vfs operation */
        struct vfsops *vs_op;
};
```

Notice that this structure contains a pointer to the `vfsops` structure, which in turn contains the `vnops` structure.
To register a filesystem, the `vfscore` library uses an additional section in the ELF.
You can inspect the [`extra.ld`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/extra.ld) file to see it.

> As we mentioned before, these sections come with help macros, so this time is no exception either.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we mentioned before, these sections come with helper macros, so this time is no exception either.
```
I think `helper macros` sounds better than `help macros`

The macro that registers a filesystem is:

```c
 UK_FS_REGISTER(fssw)
```

Where the `fssw` argument is a `vfscore_fs_type` structure.

Notice that the system call will eventually call the registered operation.
So, when adding support for a new filesystem in Unikraft, you only need to implement a subset (or all) functions in the `vnops` structure.

## Configuring Applications to use `vfscore`

> For using the vfscore, we need to have a filesystem that actually implements the file operations. You can follow the same approach as in [lib/ramfs/README.md](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/tree/staging/lib/ramfs#configuring-applications-to-use-ramfs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For using the `vfscore`, we need to have a filesystem that actually implements the file operations. You can follow the same approach as in [`lib/ramfs/README.md`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/tree/staging/lib/ramfs#configuring-applications-to-use-ramfs)
```

> For using the `vfscore`, we need to have a filesystem that actually implements the file operations. You can follow the same approach as in [lib/ramfs/README.md](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/tree/staging/lib/ramfs#configuring-applications-to-use-ramfs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For using `vfscore`, we need to have a filesystem that actually implements the file operations.
You can follow the same approach as in [`lib/ramfs/README.md`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/tree/staging/lib/ramfs#configuring-applications-to-use-ramfs).
```
Use one sentence per line.

# VFSCore: Unikraft's Virtual File System API

> `vfscore` is an internal library of Unikraft that provides a generic interface of system calls related to filesystem management.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`vfscore` (*Virtual File System Core*) is an internal library of Unikraft that provides a generic interface of system calls related to filesystem management.
```

The `vfscore` library provides 2 structures to define operations on a filesystem (defined in [`lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/mount.h`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/mount.h#L151)):

```c
struct vfsops {
        int (*vfs_mount)        (struct mount *, const char *, int, const void*);
        ...
        struct vnops    *vfs_vnops;
};
```

```c
struct vnops {
        vnop_open_t             vop_open;
        vnop_close_t            vop_close;
        vnop_read_t             vop_read;
        vnop_write_t            vop_write;
        vnop_seek_t             vop_seek;
        vnop_ioctl_t            vop_ioctl;
        ...
};
```

The first structure mainly defines the operation of mounting the filesystem, while the second defines the operations that can be executed on files (regular files, directories, etc.).
The `vnops` structure can be seen as the `file_operation` structure in the Linux Kernel (more as an idea).
More about this structure [here](https://tldp.org/LDP/lkmpg/2.4/html/c577.htm).

The filesystem library will define two such structures through which it will provide the specified operations.

> To understand how these operations end up being used let's examine the [`open` system call](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/syscalls.c#L111)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To understand how these operations end up being used, let's examine the [`open` system call](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/syscalls.c#L111)
```

```c
int
sys_open(char *path, int flags, mode_t mode, struct vfscore_file **fpp)
{
        struct vfscore_file *fp;
        struct vnode *vp;
        ...
        error = VOP_OPEN(vp, fp);
}
```

[`VOP_OPEN()`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/vnode.h#L219) is a macro that is defined as follows:

```c
#define VOP_OPEN(VP, FP)           ((VP)->v_op->vop_open)(FP)
```

> ## Register a new filesystem

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Register a New Filesystem
```

> To map the desired function for your filesystem with the `vfscore` application, you need to have declared a `struct vnops` [structure](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/ramfs/ramfs_vnops.c#L651) and populate its members, as shown below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To map the desired function for your filesystem with the `vfscore` application, you need to declare [a `struct vnops` structure](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/ramfs/ramfs_vnops.c#L651) and populate its members, as shown below:
```

Reviewer 2: Clarify that `ramfs` is just an example. A filesytem will create its own structure and implement its own functions.

```

Let's see now how to link the "file operations" of a filesystem to the `vfscore` library.
For this, the library exposes a specific structure named `vfscore_fs_type`:

```c
struct vfscore_fs_type {
        /* name of file system */
        const char *vs_name;
        /* initialize routine */
        int (*vs_init)(void);
        /* pointer to vfs operation */
        struct vfsops *vs_op;
};
```

Notice that this structure contains a pointer to the `vfsops` structure, which in turn contains the `vnops` structure.
To register a filesystem, the `vfscore` library uses an additional section in the ELF.
You can inspect the [`extra.ld`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/extra.ld) file to see it.

As we mentioned before, these sections come with helper macros, so this time is no exception either.
The macro that registers a filesystem is:

```c
 UK_FS_REGISTER(fssw)
```

Where the `fssw` argument is a `vfscore_fs_type` structure.

Notice that the system call will eventually call the registered operation.
So, when adding support for a new filesystem in Unikraft, you only need to implement a subset (or all) functions in the `vnops` structure.

> 

Reviewer 2: I would reference here the functions used by [`9pfs`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/tree/staging/lib/9pfs), to provide another example (apart from [`ramfs`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/tree/staging/lib/ramfs)) of implementing a filesystem.

> ## Configuring Applications to use `vfscore`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Configuring Applications to Use `vfscore`
```

> To use the `vfscore`, we need to have a filesystem that actually implements the file operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the `vfscore` library, we need to have a filesystem that actually implements the file operations.
```

> For using the `vfscore`, we need to have a filesystem that actually implements the file operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use `vfscore`, we need to have a filesystem that actually implements the file operations.
```

> You can follow the same approach as in [lib/ramfs/README.md](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/tree/staging/lib/ramfs#configuring-applications-to-use-ramfs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can follow the same approach as in [`lib/ramfs/README.md`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/tree/staging/lib/ramfs#configuring-applications-to-use-ramfs)
```

        vnop_ioctl_t            vop_ioctl;
        ...
};
```

The first structure mainly defines the operation of mounting the filesystem, while the second defines the operations that can be executed on files (regular files, directories, etc.).
The `vnops` structure can be seen as the `file_operation` structure in the Linux Kernel (more as an idea).
More about this structure [here](https://tldp.org/LDP/lkmpg/2.4/html/c577.htm).

The filesystem library will define two such structures through which it will provide the specified operations.
To understand how these operations end up being used, let's examine the [`open` system call](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/syscalls.c#L111)

```c
int
sys_open(char *path, int flags, mode_t mode, struct vfscore_file **fpp)
{
        struct vfscore_file *fp;
        struct vnode *vp;
        ...
        error = VOP_OPEN(vp, fp);
}
```

[`VOP_OPEN()`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/vnode.h#L219) is a macro that is defined as follows:

```c
#define VOP_OPEN(VP, FP)           ((VP)->v_op->vop_open)(FP)
```

## Register a New Filesystem

> To map the desired function for your filesystem with the `vfscore` application, you need to declare a `struct vnops` structure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To map the desired function for your filesystem with the `vfscore` application, you need to declare a `struct vnops` structure.
```

# VFSCore: Unikraft's Virtual File System API

The `vfscore` is an internal library of Unikraft that provides a generic interface of system calls related to filesystem management.
There are multiple types of filesystems available in Unikraft (e.g: `ramfs`,` 9pfs`).

## Key Functions and Data Structures

> The `vfscore` library provides 2 structures to define operations on a filesystem (defined in [lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/mount.h](/lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/mount.h)):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `vfscore` library provides 2 structures to define operations on a filesystem (defined in [lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/mount.h](/lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/mount.h:...)):
```
Add the line number.

```c
struct vfsops {
        int (*vfs_mount)        (struct mount *, const char *, int, const void*);
        ...
        struct vnops    *vfs_vnops;
};
```

```c
struct vnops {
        vnop_open_t             vop_open;
        vnop_close_t            vop_close;
        vnop_read_t             vop_read;
        vnop_write_t            vop_write;
        vnop_seek_t             vop_seek;
        vnop_ioctl_t            vop_ioctl;
        ...
};
```

> The first structure mainly defines the operation of mounting the filesystem, while the second defines the operations that can be executed on files (regular files, directories, etc).

Reviewer: I think the first structure represents the operations you can do on the filesystem, not just the mount-related ones (e.g. `sync`, `fsstat` etc.).

The `vnops` structure can be seen as the `file_operation` structure in the Linux Kernel (more as an idea).
More about this structure [here](https://tldp.org/LDP/lkmpg/2.4/html/c577.htm).

The filesystem library will define two such structures through which it will provide the specified operations.

> To understand how these operations end up being used let's examine the open system call:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand how these operations end up being used let's examine the [open system call](link to the vfscore file where open is defined):
```

```c
int
sys_open(char *path, int flags, mode_t mode, struct vfscore_file **fpp)
{
        struct vfscore_file *fp;
        struct vnode *vp;
        ...
        error = VOP_OPEN(vp, fp);
}
```

> `VOP_OPEN()` is a macro that is defined as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`VOP_OPEN()`](link to the definition of `VOP_OPEN`) is a macro that is defined as follows:
```

```c
#define VOP_OPEN(VP, FP)           ((VP)->v_op->vop_open)(FP)
```

> ## Register a new filesystem
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Register a new filesystem

```

Don't add more than one consecutive blanc line.

> To map the desired function for your filesystem with the vfscore application, you need to have declare a `struct vnops` and populate the members, as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To map the desired function for your filesystem with the vfscore application, you need to have declare a `struct vnops` structure and populate it's members, as shown below:
```

```c
struct vnops ramfs_vnops = {
		ramfs_open,             /* open */
		ramfs_close,            /* close */
		ramfs_read,             /* read */
		ramfs_write,            /* write */
		ramfs_seek,             /* seek */
		ramfs_ioctl,            /* ioctl */
		ramfs_fsync,            /* fsync */
		ramfs_readdir,          /* readdir */
		ramfs_lookup,           /* lookup */
		ramfs_create,           /* create */
		ramfs_remove,           /* remove */
		ramfs_rename,           /* remame */
		ramfs_mkdir,            /* mkdir */
		ramfs_rmdir,            /* rmdir */
		ramfs_getattr,          /* getattr */
		ramfs_setattr,          /* setattr */
		ramfs_inactive,         /* inactive */
		ramfs_truncate,         /* truncate */
		ramfs_link,             /* link */
		(vnop_cache_t) NULL,    /* arc */
		ramfs_fallocate,        /* fallocate */
		ramfs_readlink,         /* read link */
		ramfs_symlink,          /* symbolic link */
		ramfs_poll,             /* poll */

> };

Reviewer: I wouldn't add the entire structure here, do some `[...]` in the middle.
Also add a link to where these are all defined, so the user can take a look at it more in depth.

```

If some of the functions are not used or not yet defined, you can use the `vfscore_vop_nullop` and cast it to the appropriate type:

```c
#define ramfs_open      ((vnop_open_t)vfscore_vop_nullop)
#define ramfs_close     ((vnop_close_t)vfscore_vop_nullop)
#define ramfs_seek      ((vnop_seek_t)vfscore_vop_nullop)
```

Let's see now how to link the "file operations" of a filesystem to the `vfscore` library.

> For this, the library exposes a specific structure named `vfscore_fs_type`:
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this, the library exposes a specific structure named `vfscore_fs_type`:

```

```c
struct vfscore_fs_type {
        /* name of file system */
        const char *vs_name;       
        /* initialize routine */
        int (*vs_init)(void);
        /* pointer to vfs operation */
        struct vfsops *vs_op;
};
```

Notice that this structure contains a pointer to the `vfsops` structure, which in turn contains the `vnops` structure.
To register a filesystem, the `vfscore` library uses an additional section in the ELF.

> You can inspect the [`extra.ld`](/lib/vfscore/extra.ld) file to see it.

Reviewer: Add a full link here, to avoid messing up the file renderer when we upload this to the website.

> You can inspect the [`extra.ld`](/lib/vfscore/extra.ld) file to see it.
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can inspect the [`extra.ld`](/lib/vfscore/extra.ld) file to see it.

```

As we mentioned before, these sections come with help macros, so this time is no exception either.
The macro that registers a filesystem is:

```c
 UK_FS_REGISTER(fssw)
```

> Where the `fssw` argument is a `vfscore_fs_type` structure.
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where the `fssw` argument is a `vfscore_fs_type` structure.

```

# VFSCore: Unikraft's Virtual File System API

`vfscore` (*Virtual File System Core*) is an internal library of Unikraft that provides a generic interface of system calls related to filesystem management.
There are multiple types of filesystems available in Unikraft (e.g: `ramfs`, `9pfs`).

## File Organization

The `vfscore` library consists of multiple files:

```console
$ tree -L 2 lib/vfscore/
[...]
|-- vnode.c
|-- fops.c
|-- lookup.c
|-- stdio.c
|-- rootfs.c
|-- task.c
|-- syscalls.c
|-- vfs.h
`-- main.c
```

> - [`vnode.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/vnode.c) functions that interact with a [`vnode structure`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/vnode.h#L76).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`vnode.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/vnode.c) defines functions that interact with a [`vnode structure`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/vnode.h#L76).
```

- [`fops.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/fops.c) implements a subset of functions that are defined in [`vfs.h`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/vfs.h#L802), that are related with file operations.

- [`lookup.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/lookup.c) implements the subset of functions that are defined in [`vfs.h`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/vfs.h#L685), that are related to searching for a specific path in a filesystem.

> - [`stdio.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/stdio.c) exposes the functions that are used to interact with standard I / O. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`stdio.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/stdio.c) exposes the functions that are used to interact with standard IO. 
```

> You can notice that this is done very similar to defining a new filesystem, as it will be detailed later in the README.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can notice that this is done very similar to defining a new filesystem, as it will be detailed later.
```

# VFSCore: Unikraft's Virtual File System API

`vfscore` (*Virtual File System Core*) is an internal library of Unikraft that provides a generic interface of system calls related to filesystem management.
There are multiple types of filesystems available in Unikraft (e.g: `ramfs`, `9pfs`).

> ## Organization

Reviewer: I would name this section something a bit more clear, `internal structure`, `file organization` , something along those lines.

The `vfscore` library consists of multiple files:

```console
$ tree -L 1 lib/vfscore/
lib/vfscore/
[...]
├── fd.c
├── file.c
├── fops.c
├── include
├── lookup.c
├── main.c
├── stdio.c
├── syscalls.c
├── task.c
├── vfs.h
└── vnode.c

> ```

Reviewer: Use `tree --charset=ascii` when you paste a `tree` output in a `.md` file, so all characters are ascii.

> - `vnode.c` implements functions that are used to interact with the `fdtable`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `vnode.c` implements functions that are used to interact with the `fdtable`.
```

> - `vnode.c` implements functions that are used to interact with the `fdtable`

Reviewer: I think `functions that interact with a vnode structure` is more suited. You can also point to the `vnode` strcuture in `include/vfscore/vnode.h`.

> - `fops.c` implements the subset of functions that are defined in `vfs.h`, that are related with file operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `fops.c` implements the subset of functions that are defined in `vfs.h`, that are related with file operations.
```

> - `lookup.c` implements the subset of functions that are defined in `vfs.h`, that are related with searching for a specific path in a filesystem

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `lookup.c` implements the subset of functions that are defined in `vfs.h`, that are related with searching for a specific path in a filesystem.
```

> - `stdio.c` exposes the functions that are used to interact with standard I / O. We can notice that this is done very similar to defining a new filesystem, as we'll discuss later in the README

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `stdio.c` exposes the functions that are used to interact with standard I/O.
  We can notice that this is done very similar to defining a new filesystem, as we'll discuss later.
```

Reviewer: Use either the 2nd person pronouns (you) or 1st person plural (we) through the entire file. They are mixed now, pick either one of them and change the other one.

> - `rootfs.c` implements the function that is used to mount the root filesystem

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `rootfs.c` implements the function that is used to mount the root filesystem.
```

> - `task.c` implements some helper function that are used to convert between different path conventions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `task.c` implements some helper function that are used to convert between different path conventions.
```

> - `syscalls.c` does the actual generic implementation of the `sys_*` function defined in the `vfs.h`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`syscalls.c`](....) does the actual generic implementation of the `sys_*` function defined in [`vfs.h`](....).
```
Add links to files that you refer, both files that you describe and files that you point to in the description (like `vfs.h` here).

> - `main.c` defines the specific Unikraft system calls for interacting with a filesystem, which are based on the files described above. You can read more about adding a new system call for Unikraft [here](https://unikraft.org/community/hackathons/sessions/bincompat/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `main.c` defines the specific Unikraft system calls for interacting with a filesystem, which are based on the files described above.
   You can read more about adding a new system call for Unikraft on the [website](https://unikraft.org/community/hackathons/sessions/bincompat/)
```

Reviewer: I think [this link](https://unikraft.org/docs/develop/syscall-shim/) would be more suited here instead of the hackathon session.

# VFSCore: Unikraft's Virtual File System API

`vfscore` (*Virtual File System Core*) is an internal library of Unikraft that provides a generic interface of system calls related to filesystem management.
There are multiple types of filesystems available in Unikraft (e.g: `ramfs`, `9pfs`).

## File Organization

The `vfscore` library consists of multiple files:

```console

> $ tree --charset=ascii -L 2 lib/vfscore/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ tree -L 2 lib/vfscore/
```
Don't add the charset to the command, it's not relevant to the user.

[...]

> |-- extra.ld

Reviewer: I think it's a bit too much. Could be better to just add the files that you get into below.

|-- fd.c
|-- file.c
|-- fops.c
|-- include
|   |-- sys
|   `-- vfscore
|-- lookup.c
|-- main.c
|-- Makefile.uk
|-- mount.c
|-- pipe.c
|-- README.md
|-- rootfs.c
|-- stdio.c
|-- subr_uio.c
|-- syscalls.c
|-- task.c
|-- vfs.h
`-- vnode.c

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

- [`vnode.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/vnode.c) functions that interact with a [`vnode structure`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/vnode.h#L76).

> - [`fops.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/fops.c) implements the subset of functions that are defined in [`vfs.h`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/vfs.h#L802), that are related with file operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`fops.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/fops.c) implements a subset of functions that are defined in [`vfs.h`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/vfs.h#L802), that are related with file operations.
```

> - [`lookup.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/lookup.c) implements the subset of functions that are defined in [`vfs.h`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/vfs.h#L685), that are related with searching for a specific path in a filesystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`lookup.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/lookup.c) implements a subset of functions that are defined in [`vfs.h`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/vfs.h#L685), that are related to searching for a specific path in a filesystem.
```

> - [`stdio.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/stdio.c) exposes the functions that are used to interact with standard I / O. You can notice that this is done very similar to defining a new filesystem, as it will be detailed later in the README.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`stdio.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/stdio.c) exposes the functions that are used to interact with standard I/O.
You can notice that this is done very similar to defining a new filesystem, as it will be detailed later in the README.
```
Use one sentence per line.

- [`rootfs.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/rootfs.c) implements the function that is used to mount the root filesystem.

> - [`task.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/task.c) implements some helper function that are used to convert between different path conventions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`task.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/task.c) implements some helper functions that are used to convert between different path conventions.
```

- [`syscalls.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/syscalls.c) does the actual generic implementation of the `sys_*` function defined in [`vfs.h`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/vfs.h#L121).

> - [`main.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/main.c) defines the specific Unikraft system calls for interacting with a filesystem, which are based on the files described above. You can read more about adding a new system call for Unikraft [here](https://unikraft.org/docs/develop/syscall-shim/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`main.c`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/vfscore/main.c) defines the specific Unikraft system calls for interacting with a filesystem, which are based on the files described above.
You can read more about adding a new system call for Unikraft [here](https://unikraft.org/docs/develop/syscall-shim/).
```
Use one sentence per line.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

# VFSCore: Unikraft's Virtual File System API

The `vfscore` is an internal library of Unikraft that provides a generic interface of system calls related to filesystem management.
There are multiple types of filesystems available in Unikraft (e.g: `ramfs`,` 9pfs`).

## Key Functions and Data Structures

> The `vfscore` library provides 2 structures to define operations on a filesystem (defined in `lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/mount.h`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `vfscore` library provides 2 structures to define operations on a filesystem (defined in [`lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/mount.h`](link to file)):
```
I would add a link here.

};
```

```c
struct vnops {
        vnop_open_t             vop_open;
        vnop_close_t            vop_close;
        vnop_read_t             vop_read;
        vnop_write_t            vop_write;
        vnop_seek_t             vop_seek;
        vnop_ioctl_t            vop_ioctl;
        ...
};
```

The first structure mainly defines the operation of mounting the filesystem, while the second defines the operations that can be executed on files (regular files, directories, etc).
The `vnops` structure can be seen as the `file_operation` structure in the Linux Kernel (more as an idea).
More about this structure [here](https://tldp.org/LDP/lkmpg/2.4/html/c577.htm).

The filesystem library will define two such structures through which it will provide the specified operations.
To understand how these operations end up being used let's examine the open system call:

```c
int
sys_open(char *path, int flags, mode_t mode, struct vfscore_file **fpp)
{
        struct vfscore_file *fp;
        struct vnode *vp;
        ...
        error = VOP_OPEN(vp, fp);
}
```

`VOP_OPEN()` is a macro that is defined as follows:

```c
#define VOP_OPEN(VP, FP)           ((VP)->v_op->vop_open)(FP)

> ```

Reviewer: I would add an example of how the `VOP_OPEN` is defined in an actual filesystem (e.g. ramfs).
Just explain one of the declarations [here](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/ramfs/ramfs_vnops.c#L638-L676), on how the `ramfs_vnops` structure is defined. Same for [`vfsops`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/ramfs/ramfs_vfsops.c#L49-L63).
I would also add a few lines on how to register a new filesystem (see [here](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/lib/ramfs/ramfs_vfsops.c#L65-L71) for `ramfs`).

Notice that the system call will eventually call the registered operation.
So, when adding support for a new filesystem in Unikraft, you only need to implement a subset (or all) functions in the `vnops` structure.

## Configuring Applications to use `vfscore`

> For using the vfscore, we need to have a filesystem that actually implements the file operations. You can follow the same approach as in [lib/ramfs/README.md](../ramfs/README md#configuring-applications-to-use-ramfs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For using the vfscore, we need to have a filesystem that actually implements the file operations.
You can follow the same approach as in [lib/ramfs/README.md](full link)
```
Please add a full link here, this may break when rendering the file on the website.

# VFSCore: Unikraft's Virtual File System API

> The `vfscore` is an internal library of Unikraft that provides a generic interface of system calls related to filesystem management. I

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `vfscore` is an internal library of Unikraft that provides a generic interface of system calls related to filesystem management.
```

> There are multiple types of filesystems available in Unikraft (e.g: `ramfs`,` 9pfs`).
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are multiple types of filesystems available in Unikraft (e.g: `ramfs`,` 9pfs`).

```

## Key Functions and Data Structures

The `vfscore` library provides 2 structures to define operations on a filesystem (defined in `lib/vfscore/include/vfscore/mount.h`):

```c
struct vfsops {
        int (*vfs_mount)        (struct mount *, const char *, int, const void*);
        ...
        struct vnops    *vfs_vnops;
};
```

```c
struct vnops {
        vnop_open_t             vop_open;
        vnop_close_t            vop_close;
        vnop_read_t             vop_read;
        vnop_write_t            vop_write;
        vnop_seek_t             vop_seek;
        vnop_ioctl_t            vop_ioctl;
        ...
};
```

The first structure mainly defines the operation of mounting the filesystem, while the second defines the operations that can be executed on files (regular files, directories, etc).
The `vnops` structure can be seen as the `file_operation` structure in the Linux Kernel (more as an idea).
More about this structure [here](https://tldp.org/LDP/lkmpg/2.4/html/c577.htm).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More about this structure [here](https://tldp.org/LDP/lkmpg/2.4/html/c577.htm).

```

The filesystem library will define two such structures through which it will provide the specified operations.
To understand how these operations end up being used let's examine the open system call:

```c
int
sys_open(char *path, int flags, mode_t mode, struct vfscore_file **fpp)
{
        struct vfscore_file *fp;
        struct vnode *vp;
        ...
        error = VOP_OPEN(vp, fp);
}
```

`VOP_OPEN()` is a macro that is defined as follows:

```c
#define VOP_OPEN(VP, FP)           ((VP)->v_op->vop_open)(FP)
```

> Notice that he system call will eventually call the registered operation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that the system call will eventually call the registered operation. 
```
